A Quantum Algorithm for Ray Casting using an
Orthographic Camera
Carolina Alves

Luı́s Paulo Santos

Thomas Bashford-Rogers

Universidade do Minho
Braga, Portugal
a75610@alunos.uminho.pt

Universidade do Minho & INESC-TEC &
Quantum Software Engineering, INL
Braga, Portugal
psantos@di.uminho.pt

University of West of England
Bristol, United Kingdom
Tom.Bashford-Rogers@uwe.ac.uk

Abstract—Quantum computing has the potential to provide
solutions to many problems which are challenging or out of reach
of classical computers. There are several problems in rendering
which are amenable to being solved in quantum computers, but
these have yet to be demonstrated in practice. This work takes
a ﬁrst step in applying quantum computing to one of the most
fundamental operations in rendering: ray casting. This technique
computes visibility between two points in a 3D model of the world
which is described by a collection of geometric primitives. The
algorithm returns, for a given ray, which primitive it intersects
closest to its origin. Without a spatial acceleration structure, the
classical complexity for this operation is O(N ). In this paper, we
propose an implementation of Grover’s Algorithm (a quantum
search algorithm) for ray casting. This provides a quadratic speed
up allowing
for visibility evaluation for unstructured primitives
√
in O( N ). However, due to technological limitations associated
with current quantum computers, in this work the geometrical
setup is limited to rectangles and parallel rays (orthographic
projection).
Index Terms—quantum computing, ray casting, Grover’s algorithm, complexity

I. I NTRODUCTION
The ﬁeld of quantum computing has registered huge developments over the last few years, raising the perspective for
this alternative computing paradigm to become practical and
advantageous in the medium term.
Richard Feynman is believed to have been the ﬁrst to
propose using quantum mechanics as a model for computation
[1]. Theoretical results soon followed, with, for example, the
proposal of the quantum Turing machine by Deutsch in 1985
[2] and algorithms that lie in the heart of most quantum
programs, including Grover’s for unstructured searching [3],
Shor’s for prime factorization [4] and the Quantum Fourier
Transform [5].
More recently, technological advances made it possible for
some companies to make quantum computers available to
the community. These machines still impose quite demanding
This work was partially ﬁnanced by National Funds through the Portuguese funding agency, FCT – Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia
– within project: UID/EEA/50014/2019. This work was partially funded by
SmartEGOV/NORTE-01-0145-FEDER-000037, supported by Norte Portugal
Regional Operational Programme (NORTE 2020), under the PORTUGAL
2020 Partnership Agreement, through the European Regional Development
Fund (EFDR).
978-1-7281-6378-9/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE

limitations on the size and execution time of the problems
they can solve, due to limited coherence times, reduced
number of qubits and signiﬁcant error rates at the gates
level. Nevertheless, the number of researchers, practitioners
and companies experimenting with prototype applications to
solve an ever growing variety of problems has been increasing
exponentially. This rising interest on quantum computing is
largely supported by an huge investment both from private
companies and research funding institutions [6], [7].
An n-qubits quantum computation evolves on an exponential state space, representing at each instant a linear superposition of 2n states. Each computing step leads the system
to another superposition, acting on the 2n states simultaneously without any resources replication. On the other hand,
a classical n-bits system represents at each instant a single
state out of the 2n possible states and a computing step leads
to a single subsequent state. It is this exponential quantum
parallelism that holds the promise of the quantum advantage
over classical computing. For some problems quantum algorithms have been found which exhibit better complexity than
classical alternatives, allowing for the efﬁcient computation
of otherwise intractable problem sizes. Grover’s algorithm [3]
for √searching on a N elements unstructured domain exhibits
O( N ) time complexity, as opposed to O(N ) in the classical
setting: in the worst case all N elements of the domain have
to be veriﬁed.
Ray casting is a well known rendering technique, consisting
on shooting a ray from a point along a given direction to
determine whether i) that direction is occluded (i.e., the ray
intersects at least one geometric primitive), or ii) what is
the visible geometric primitive along the ray’s direction (i.e.,
among all primitives intersected by the ray which one is nearer
to the ray’s origin). If there are N geometric primitives and
if these are not ordered on any manner, then classical ray
casting requires testing intersection against all primitives, with
complexity O(N ).
This paper demonstrates the application of Grover’s algorithm to ray casting, addressing both the occlusion
√ and the
visibility problems, with worst-case complexity O( N ). Even
though using Grover’s for this purpose has been suggested
before [8]–[10], no implementations and no real results were,
to the best of the authors’ knowledge, ever presented. We

Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: UNIVERSIDADE DO MINHO. Downloaded on April 05,2021 at 13:52:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

propose concrete implementations and present results obtained
both on a simulator and on a real quantum computer. Advantages and limitations of the proposed approach are discussed.
All experiments, both simulations and real quantum computer
executions, were performed using IBM’s quantum computing
framework, Qiskit1 , and Tokyo, the IBM Q Network 20 qubits
machine.
Current circuit-based quantum computers provide no functional units to perform even the most fundamental arithmetic
operations to mathematical data types, such as integers or
ﬂoating point numbers. In fact, the program consists essentially on a list of basic transformations, referred to as gates, to
apply to the qubits. Supporting complex operations, such as
non-integer number representations or trigonometric functions,
requires implementing them at the gate level. Besides the
obvious programming overhead, these additional gates would
dramatically increase the circuit depth and the number of
required qubits, pushing the limits well beyond what is possible with today’s noisy and limited scale quantum computers.
In order to avoid such overheads this paper deals only with
integers, the view plane is contained within the Z=0 plane,
all geometric primitives are axis-aligned rectangles parallel
to the view plane and the rays are perpendicular to the
view plane and parallel to the Z-axis (thus the orthographic
projection); all coordinates ((x, y) for pixels and rays, (x, y, z)
for points in space) are integers. These restrictions facilitate
the development of the quantum program and make it possible
to use current simulators and real machines. There are, however, no theoretical reasons why ﬂoating point numbers and
trigonometric functions cannot be used. They just wouldn’t be
feasible on current hardware given the limitations imposed by
the technology state of the art.

Even though the quantum computation evolves on an exponentially large state space, computing all solutions simultaneously, this space is not accessible. Upon measurement the
superposition |Ψ collapses onto one basis state |i, among
all basis states included on |Ψ, with probability |αi |2 . Any
posterior measurements will return the same basis state and
the probability with which it was selected (|αi |2 ) is also
not accessible - all the information on the superposition is
lost with the measurement and the register behaves now as
classical data. The role of quantum algorithms is to maximize
the probability of measuring the desirable states within a
superposition and to postpone measurements (i.e., reading
quantum data) until the last step of the algorithm.
The laws of Quantum Mechanics require that all operations
performed on qubits are unitary and reversible. The former
means that the norm of the vector of basis states coefﬁcients
αi is maintained and is equal to 1 after the transformation; this is required since the vector of αi ’s is in fact a
probability distribution. Reversibility is a consequence of the
unitary requirement and means that given the outputs of the
transformation its inputs can be known: the computation is
reversible. Reversibility has several consequences at the circuit
level: all quantum gates, which operate over qubits, must have
the same number of inputs and outputs; this often results in
circuits with a larger number of gates and more qubits than
would be required for their classical counterpart. Information
is never destroyed, since the computation can be reversed.
According to the Landauer’s principle [11] the erasure of a
bit of information corresponds to the dissipation of energy in
the form of heat to the environment; quantum computing does
not destroy information (up to the ﬁnal measurements) and
has thus the potential to be more power efﬁcient than classical
computing.
The quantum circuit model represents quantum programs as
a series of gates applied to qubits. Each qubit is represented
as a horizontal line and each gate is connected to the qubits
it interacts with. Whereas with classical circuits signals ﬂow
along the circuit, with quantum circuits time ﬂows along
the circuit, from left to right – qubits do not ﬂow, rather
gate operations are applied onto the qubits (for example as
microwaves used in some technologies). Gates can be written
in matrix form, which are applied to the qubits. For example,
the Hadamard H and X (NOT) gates can be expressed as:

II. Q UANTUM C OMPUTING : S HORT OVERVIEW
A. Fundamentals
The basic quantum unit of information is the qubit |b,
which allows a linear superposition of two orthogonal basis
states |0 and |1:
|b = α0 |0 + α1 |1, α0 , α1 ∈ C, |α0 |2 + |α1 |2 = 1
With n qubits a superposition |Ψ over N = 2n basis states
can be created:
|Ψ =

N
−1

i=0

αi |i, αi ∈ C,

N
−1


|αi |2 = 1


1 1
H=√
2 1

i=0

For a uniform superposition all basis states’ weights are equal,
αi = α = √1N . Any operation over a superposition will
act simultaneously on the 2n states, in what is referred to
as exponential quantum parallelism. This means that applying
a function f (·) once to superposition |Ψ, effectively results
on a new superposition |Ψ  containing all N = 2n values of
f (|Ψ).



1
0
,X =
−1
1


1
0

(1)

Figure 1 illustrates one such circuit: the qubits initial state is
|0, converted into an uniform superposition using Hadamard
gates; then |q0  is negated (the coefﬁcients of basis states |0
and |1 are swapped) and ﬁnally measurement gates are used,
reading one of the basis states present in |q0 q1  to classical
register c, according to the respective probability (in this case
0.25, since the 4 states are equally probable).

1 https://qiskit.org/

57
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: UNIVERSIDADE DO MINHO. Downloaded on April 05,2021 at 13:52:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

III. R ELATED W ORK
In 2001 Andrew Glassner discussed quantum computing
on his notebook [8]–[10] and suggested applying Grover’s
algorithm to the Z-buffer and ray casting problems. For the
former a superposition over all the polygons and respective
depth could be created and Grover used to identify the
minimum depth. For the latter a superposition over all spheres
and respective parameters (a, b, c) could be created; equation
at2 + bt + c = 0 would then be solved simultaneously
for all spheres and Grover used to locate the minimum
positive t. For both problems a quadratic advantage could
be obtained over an unordered classical search. Sadakane et
al. [12] present a theoretical analysis of the complexity of
Grover’s, and a closely related minimum ﬁnding algorithm
[13], applied to several geometric applications, including
nearest neighbor, separation and function maximizing queries,
geometric optimization problems (minimum enclosing ball,
common intersection emptiness and convex hull computation)
and intersection detection among large dimensional geometric elements. Simona Caraiman [14] also proposes applying
Grover’s algorithm to the Z-buffer and ray tracing problems.
Additionally, she proposes addressing photon mapping, using
Grover’s for k-nearest neighbor queries, besides the photon
shooting and the ray tracing stages. Lanzagorta and Uhlmann
[15] propose using Grover’s algorithm for a number of computational geometry problems, including nearest neighbour
queries, object-object intersection, Z-buffering, ray tracing,
radiosity and level of detail, among others. A detailed time
and space complexity analysis is used to argue that quantum
search is asymptotically advantageous over classical search for
large domains (large N ) and domain dimensionality d >= 3.
Classical spatially ordering the search space in such conditions
requires O(N logd−1 N ) space for a query time complexity
of O(logd N ), but since N and d are large, such spatial
ordering in not feasible. Classical computing has thus to resort
to unsorted search, which is O(N ) in both space
√ and time;
quantum searching under such conditions is O( N ) in time
and O(N ) in space, thus presenting a quadratic speedup.
All the above cited works maintain the discussion at the
algorithmic and complexity analysis levels. No simulation,
implementation or execution of the proposed algorithms is
performed and no real experimental results are presented. This
paper presents an actual implementation and real results for
the ray casting problem.
A different problem is addressed by Johnston [16]. The
author performs pixel level supersampling by resorting to the
quantum amplitude estimation algorithm to numerically integrate sub pixel samples through a combination of a quantum
algorithm and a classical lookup table. Experimental results
show improvements, compared to those obtained with classical
Monte Carlo integration for the same number of samples.
These results are obtained using a simulator, a IBM ﬁve
qubit machine, and a photonic quantum computer. This paper
focuses on supersampling pixels based on a known underlying
signal, whereas our work computes this signal from a scene

Fig. 1. An example quantum circuit.

B. Grover’s Algorithm
For n qubits, and N = 2n , let f : {0 . . . N − 1} −→ {0, 1},
such that

0←x = x∗
f (x) =
1←x = x∗
The problem being addressed is ﬁnding the value(s) x∗ ∈
{0 . . . N − 1} : f (x∗ ) = 1. If nothing is known about f (·)
then a classical approach must, in the worst case, evaluate the
function N − t + 1 ∝ O(N ) times (where t is the number of
∗
different x∗ satisfying f (·)). Grover’s
 algorithm will ﬁnd x
by executing the function only O( Nt ) times, thus exhibiting
a quadratic advantage.
Grover’s algorithm starts by creating an uniform superposition over all basis states, |Ψ, by using Hadamard gates. |Ψ
can be expressed as a sum of two vectors: |Ψ1  contains the
basis states for which f (·) = 1 (referred to as the ”good”
states), and |Ψ0  contains the remaining. From Figure 2 left,
it can be seen that |Ψ = sin θa |Ψ1  + cos θa |Ψ0 , thus
2
the probability of measuring a state in |Ψ
1  is sin θa ; this
t
probability is also Nt , therefore sin θa =
N . The goal is
to maximize the probability of measuring a state in |Ψ1 ,
which is achieved by applying multiple iterations of Grover’s
operator, Q. The ﬁrst stage in this operator is the oracle O,
which implements f (·) and negates the sign of the ”good”
states’ coefﬁcients according to O|i = (−1)f (|i) ∗ |i (see
Figure 2 center). Marking the ”good” states does not change
their probability; this is achieved by the diffusion operator,
D, which performs a reﬂection over the average, depicted
in Figure 2, right, as a reﬂection over the uniform superposition. After one application of Q = DO the probability
of measuring a ”good” state has increased. It can be shown
that after r iterations of Q the resulting state is |Ψ(r)  =
sin ((2r + 1)θa )|Ψ1  + cos ((2r + 1)θa )|Ψ0 . Maximizing the
probability of measuring a basis state in |Ψ1  amounts to
making sin ((2r + 
1)θa ) ≈ 1, which
 for sufﬁciently large N
results in r ≈ π4 Nt , i.e., O( Nt ) Grover iterations are
required, resulting on a quadratic speed up over the classical
case. Performing more iterations than the ideal r actually
reduces the probability of measuring a good state; successful
application of Grover’s depends on the ability to compute r
and, consequently, on the previous knowledge of t.

58
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: UNIVERSIDADE DO MINHO. Downloaded on April 05,2021 at 13:52:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 2. Grover’s algorithm. Left: Uniform superposition. Center: the oracle negates the sign of the ”good” states’ coefﬁcients. Right: the diffusion operator
reﬂects the quantum state over the uniform superposition; the probability of measuring a basis state in |Ψ1  increased from sin2 θa to sin2 (3 ∗ θa ).

B. Quantum Algorithm

description.

Grover’s algorithm is used to identify intersections between
a given ray (x, y) and the geometric primitives. A detailed
description is given in Algorithms 1 and 2. These algorithms
assume there are N = 2n primitives indexed from 0 . . . N − 1
using a n qubit quantum register labelled as |p; quantum
register |c is prepared with the coordinates of the primitives, requiring nc qubits, nc = log2 (max(maxX , maxY )).
Transforms {m|M }{X|Y } generate the minimum (resp. maximum) X (resp. Y) coordinates of a primitive from its index;
these are functions of the IDs of the primitives deﬁned for
each scene and the circuit is derived using basic Boolean
simpliﬁcation techniques.

IV. R AY C ASTING : SINGLE SOLUTION CASE
This section addresses the case where no more than one
primitive projects to each pixel. For each primary ray, and
thus for each quantum query, there is only zero or one solution.
The important points are: i) the number of solutions is known
(t = 1), which is fundamental for calculating the number of
Grover’s iterations (t = 0 will be handled as a failure to ﬁnd a
solution) and ii) the occlusion and visibility problems are the
same, since the ray intersects only one primitive.
A. Geometric Setup
Current quantum computers do not include functional units
to perform any kind of arithmetic operation over any data
type (integers, ﬂoating point, etc.). To overcome such handicap an orthographic projection is used, with all coordinates
being positive integers. The view plane is contained in plane
Z = 0, primitives are rectangles parallel to the view plane
(constant positive Z) and primary rays are parallel among
themselves and the Z axis (X, Y constant); there is a one
to one correspondence between pixels in the image plane and
primary rays. Primitives are characterized by ﬁve parameters:
(minX , maxX , minY , maxY , Z); the latter is not relevant for
the non-overlapping case addressed on this section, since at
most one primitive projects onto a pixel (x, y). A ray intersects
a primitive if minX ≤ x ≤ maxX ∧ minY ≤ y ≤ maxY ,
dispensing with any numerical calculations. Figure 3 presents

Algorithm 1 Q RayCast: quantum algorithm for ray (x, y),
N primitives and r iterations
Superposition over the primitives IDs: |p = H ⊗n |0⊗n
for r iterations do
Grover’s oracle {Algorithm 2}
Grover’s diffusion operator
end for
ID ← Measure |p
return ID
Algorithm 2 Oracle for ray (x, y) intersection with N primitives
|Hint ← |1; |Vint ← |1
minX : |p|c = mX|p|0⊗nc
Negate Hint if x ≥ c; revert |c
maxX : |p|c = MX|p|0⊗nc
Negate Hint if x ≤ c; revert |c
minY : |p|c = mY|p|0⊗nc
Negate Vint if y ≥ c; revert |c
maxY : |p|c = MY|p|0⊗nc
Negate Vint if y ≤ c; revert |c
|intersect = |Hint ∧ |Vint
Flip the primitive’s coefﬁcient sign if intersect = 1: |p =
(−1)intersect ∗ |p
Revert |Hint, |Vint and |intersect

Fig. 3. Geometric setup for the non-overlapping case.

the non-overlapping setup for the 2D/3D case (Z is not
relevant).

After execution of Algorithm 1 the probability of reading
the ID of the primitive that intersects the ray, i.e., ps , the suc-

59
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: UNIVERSIDADE DO MINHO. Downloaded on April 05,2021 at 13:52:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

subcircuit uses Hadamard gates to prepare |p onto an uniform
superposition. Only 1 Grover iteration is required (r = 1, see
Table I) together with 5 ancillary qubits logically organized
onto 2 registers: |aux and |aux2. Finally, measurement gates
measure the quantum state and store the result on classical
register |c.

TABLE I
r, ps AND ps,c=2 FOR G ROVER ’ S WITH A SINGLE SOLUTION
N
1/N
r
ps
ps,c=2

4
0.250
1
1.000
1.000

8
0.125
2
0.945
0.997

16
0.063
3
0.961
0.999

64
0.016
6
0.997
1.000

256
0.04
12
1.000
1.000

1024
0.01
25
0.999
1.000

√
cess probability, is sin2 ((2r+1)θa ) with θa = sin−1 (1/ N ).
For N > 4 this probability is close to, but less than, 1.
Table I presents ps for different numbers of primitives. Upon
measurement three different cases can occur:
1) the intersecting primitive is measured;
2) a non-intersecting primitive is measured, but in fact the
ray intersects one primitive;
3) a non-intersecting primitive is measured and in fact
there is no intersection (all primitives have a uniform
probability = 1/N of being measured).
Fig. 4. Geometric setup for the non-overlapping case.

Algorithm 3 Hybrid algorithm for the non overlapping case
(single solution)
for all pixels (x, y) on the image plane do
intersected = False
iteration√= 0
r =  π4 N 
while not intersected and (iteration < c) do
ID = Q RayCast (x,y,primitives,r) {Algorithm 1}
intersected = intersect (x,y, ID)
iteration ++
end while
end for

Figure 5 depicts the oracle. Each of the {m|M }{X|Y }
operators generates the minimum (resp. maximum) X (resp.
Y ) bounds of each primitive onto |b. The ge and le operators
compare the bounds with the ray’s coordinates (x, y), which
are hardwired into the circuit; comparison results for y (resp.
x) are stored onto |aux21  (resp. |aux22 ), referred above
as |Vint (resp. |Hint). These are then anded together onto
|aux20  (|intersect), using a reversible Toffoli gate. The latter
will thus be |1 for the primitives intersected by the ray and
|0 for the remaining (the whole circuit is on a superposition
over all possible states of |p: 4 basis states in this example).
After each of the comparison operators the bounds generator
operator appears again: this is required to reverse the state
computed onto |b, resetting its value to |00 before it is
used again for the next computation. Such is the nature of
quantum reversible computing: all computations have to be
undone before the qubits can be used again by some other
operator. The detailed circuits for each of the bounds generator
and the magnitude comparison operators are not shown since
these are just basic Boolean operations implemented using
reversible quantum gates. Finally, a rotation over the Z axis is
applied to |p conditioned to |aux20  being |1, thus ﬂipping
the sign of the coefﬁcients of those primitives which intersect
ray (x, y).
After the above described circuit the state of |aux2 hasn’t
been reversed to |000. However, all anciliary have to be
reversed into the original state, which implies repeating the
whole circuit in reversed order (or in fact in some order
guaranteed to be the inverse of the state preparation circuit).
The last Toffoli gate in Figure 5 reverses the state of |aux20 ;
this is followed by a complete repetition of the remaining of
the circuit, in order to reverse |aux21  and |aux22  – these
are not depicted here due to space constraints.

Algorithm 3 calls quantum Algorithm 1 and then veriﬁes
whether the ray intersects the measured primitive – this is
an hybrid algorithm, since the classical code calls a quantum
program. If the measured primitive is not intersected the
quantum algorithm is executed again. If after c such iterations
no measured primitive intersects the ray, then that pixel is not
occluded with probability
ps,c = ps +

c−1


ps (1 − ps )j

j=1

according to the geometric distribution. The last row of Table
I presents ps,c=2 for different numbers of primitives. Note
that within this paper’s context, verifying whether a given ray
intersects a speciﬁc primitive is O(1): the goal of the quantum
approach is to reduce the number of evaluations of the intersect
function, not the cost of each such evaluation.
C. Circuit
Figure 4 presents the quantum circuit for a setup with 4
primitives and max(x, y) = 3, which requires up to 2 qubits
to represent maxX and maxY (|b on the circuit). The H

60
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: UNIVERSIDADE DO MINHO. Downloaded on April 05,2021 at 13:52:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 5. Oracle for ray casting.

D. Results

TABLE II
N UMBER OF GATES , TOTAL NUMBER OF QUBITS AND CIRCUIT DEPTH FOR

Figure 6 presents the images obtained with the Qiskit
simulator for two geometric conﬁgurations (scenes) with 4
and 8 primitives, respectively. The dots depicted in each pixel
represent the number of iterations required to evaluate the
pixel with c = 2. For the single solution case the probability
of measuring a non intersecting primitive is not signiﬁcant;
the intersecting primitive was always measured on the ﬁrst
iteration of Algorithm 3. When there is no intersection the
algorithm will run c iterations.

BOTH SCENES

Scene
4 primitives
8 primitives

Gates
83
195

Depth
33
68

Qubits
9
15

no signiﬁcant conclusion can be extracted from them. Figure
7 presents an histogram of the measured primitives for pixel
(x = 1, y = 2), with a single iteration of Algorithm 3 and 256
trials, for both the simulated and the real machine. While the
former is 100% accurate, the latter is overwhelmed by noise,
resulting in an almost uniform distribution of probability over
all possible measured states.

(a) 4x4 image and scene with 4 (b) 8x8 image and scene with 8
primitives
primitives
Fig. 6. Reference images obtained with the Qiskit simulator for the no
overlapping case. Numbers identify the primitive; the number of dots indicates
algorithm 3 iterations due to measuring a non intersecting primitive.
Fig. 7. Histogram: primitive measurements for simulator and real machine.

Table II presents the total number of gates, total number
of qubits and circuit depth (length, in gates, of the longest
path) for an exemplary pixel (x = 1, y = 2) for both scenes
(4 and 8 primitives). Even for the simpler scene the circuit
depth is 33; this is well above what can be reliably executed
on current quantum machines at the time of writing. In fact,
noise is additive over the gates and, additionally, execution
times must be kept short due to qubits dephasing and limited
coherence times. The situation is even worse in practice since
these circuits have to be mapped onto the real machine, which
has limited connectivity among physical qubits and supports
a limited set of gates; the executable circuit gate count and
depth is therefore signiﬁcantly larger. The results of such a
large quantum circuit are therefore noisy to the point where

To allow execution on a real machine a simpler circuit was
prepared for the scene depicted in Figure 8(a); each primitive has coordinates equal to its ID, therefore the operators
{m|M }{X|Y } that generate the primitive bounds are not required. The ray coordinates can be compared directly with the
primitive ID and the bounds representation |b is not required
(compare with Figure 5). The circuit for pixel (x = 2, y = 2)
requires 7 qubits and 48 gates for a maximum depth of 19.
Figure 8(b) presents the histogram for the execution of a single
iteration of Algorithm 3, 256 trials with the simpliﬁed circuit.
The correct primitive is measured with probability ≈ 0.5 while
the second most probable measurement is |00 – this is due to
qubit decoherence (the state relaxes towards |00) and can be

61
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: UNIVERSIDADE DO MINHO. Downloaded on April 05,2021 at 13:52:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Algorithm 4 QSearch: Quantum exponential search algorithm
for the overlapping case - pixel (x, y)

corrected (eventually not using state |00 as a primitive ID and
treating it as an error). These results suggest that real quantum
computers can be used in the future, as qubits coherence times
increase and gate errors decrease.

intersected = False; iteration = 0
l = 0 ; g = 1.3
while not intersected and (iteration < c) do
ID = Q SampleUniformDistribution (primitives)
intersected = intersect (x,y, ID)
if not intersected then
l =l+1
√
S = max(g l , N )
r = rand(1 . . . S)
ID = Q RayCast (x,y,primitives,r)
intersected = intersect (x,y, ID)
iteration++
end if
end while

(a) 4x4 image and scene
with 4 primitives

Fig. 9. 8 primitives scene with 3 different depths.

(b) Histogram for 256 trials, pixel (2, 2)
Fig. 8. Simpliﬁed setup for execution on the real quantum machine.

– see Figure 10. The probabilistic nature of the algorithm
and the importance of the random sampling step are clearly
demonstrated by the number of iterations required to ﬁnd
an occluding primitive. For example, pixels (2, 1), (1, 2) and
(3, 2) results are found with 0 iterations by random sampling
and other pixels require arbitrarily 1 or 2 iterations (with an
unreported number of Grover iterations).

V. R AY C ASTING : OCCLUSION WITH MULTIPLE
SOLUTIONS

By adding a third dimension to the primitives it becomes
possible that more than one primitive projects into the same
pixel; the number of solutions to Grover’s algorithm, t, can
now range from 0 (no occlusion) to the total number of
primitives, N . As long as t is known and less than N/2 the
problem can still be solved using the algorithm proposed in the
previous 
section by setting the number of Grover’s iterations
r ←  π4 Nt . But in real cases the number of primitives
projecting onto a given pixel is unknown, therefore r cannot
be set a priori to the ideal number of iterations.
A. Algorithm

Fig. 10. 4x4 occlusion image with 8 primitives and multiple possible solutions
per pixel.

We use an algorithm proposed by Boyer et al. [17] based
 on
exponential search and demonstrated to converge in O( Nt )
iterations; the case t = 0 is handled by terminating after a
constant number of iterations, c. At each iteration, Algorithm
4 exponentially increases the maximum number of possible
Grover iterations S and then randomly selects r from 1 . . . S.
At each iteration the primitives are also randomly sampled,
which will succeed with probability Nt .

VI. R AY C ASTING : VISIBILITY WITH MULTIPLE
SOLUTIONS

In order to compute which primitive, if any, is visible
along each pixel the minimum depth (Z coordinate) has to
be evaluated. We use an approach based on Durr et al. [13]
and given as Algorithm 5. The minimum depth is initialized
with some maximal value. The exponential search described
in Algorithm 4, augmented with the current minimum depth,
is then executed; if a primitive is found and if its depth is
less than the current minimum then the latter and associated
primitive are updated. Augmenting Algorithm 4 consists of

B. Results
A scene with 8 primitives at 3 different depths (Figure
9) is used to empirically verify Algorithm 4. Simulation
results show 100% convergence, with an occluding primitive
being measured for all pixels where such a primitive exists

62
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: UNIVERSIDADE DO MINHO. Downloaded on April 05,2021 at 13:52:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Algorithm 5 QMin: Quantum minimum algorithm

VII. C ONCLUSIONS

p = −1; pZ = maxZ; visible = False
while iteration < c do
intersected, ID = Q Search Min (x, y, pZ, primitives)
if intersected then
visible = True
if depth[ID] < pZ then
pZ = depth[ID]; p = ID
end if
end if
iteration ++
end while

Practical algorithms and implementations of ray casting for
visibility testing and occlusion from an orthographic camera
based on quantum algorithms are proposed. These have been
evaluated both via simulation of a quantum machine, indicative
of future quantum computing capabilities, and in a simpliﬁed
form on a real quantum computer. While these implementations are not yet fully ﬂedged and further work is required to
increase the probability of selecting intersecting primitives,
the results show the potential of quantum computation for
computer graphics through a reduction of time complexity for
core operations in a rendering pipeline. Challenges, w.r.t. ray
casting, include improvements on size and reliability at the
hardware level and handling of more general geometric setups
at the algorithmic level.
As future work, we intend to investigate quantum counting
schemes to estimate the number of iterations required for
Grover’s algorithm. We aim to support generalised geometric
setups, such as triangles and arbitrary ray directions. However,
this will likely require more qubits and deeper circuits, and,
consequently, noise tolerance in quantum algorithms for graphics, which might, eventually, be achieved by using quantum
error correction schemes.

augmenting the oracle given in Algorithm 2 (Figure 5) with
depth data. Besides generating the primitives’ bounds and
comparing with the ray coordinates, now also the primitives
depths are generated and compared with the current minimum
depth; the oracle will only ﬂip a primitive’s coefﬁcient sign if
the 5 conditions (bounds and depth) are satisﬁed. The quantum
circuit is now adaptive, being redesigned at each iteration of
Algorithm 5 to account for the current minimum depth.
A. Results
Simulation results (see Figure 11) show that although occlusion is always correctly computed, there are a few pixels
where the primitive with correct minimum depth was not
found. The histogram in Figure 12 shows, for pixel (0,0), that
the correct primitive is found ≈ 80% of the trials, which is
also conﬁrmed by the presented images: 8 out of 10 pixels
are correctly measured. A more thorough evaluation of the
probabilities is required to increase the effectiveness of the
proposed approach.

(a) Reference

(b) Trial 1

R EFERENCES
[1] R. P. Feynman, “Simulating Physics with Computers,” International
Journal of Theoretical Physics, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 467–488, 1982.
[2] D. Deutsch, “Quantum theory, the Church-Turing principle and the
universal quantum computer,” Proceedings of the Royal Society of
London, vol. 400, pp. 97–117, 1985.
[3] L. K. Grover, “A fast quantum mechanical algorithm for database
search,” in Proc. of the 28th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of
Computing, STOC ’96, pp. 212–219, ACM, 1996.
[4] P. W. Shor, “Polynomial-time algorithms for prime factorization and discrete logarithms on a quantum computer,” SIAM Journal on Computing,
vol. 26, pp. 1484–1509, 1997.
[5] D. Coppersmith, “An approximate fourier transform useful in quantum
factoring,” Tech. Rep. RC19642, IBM Research Division, 1994.
[6] A. de Touzalin, C. Marcus, F. Heijman, I. Cirac, R. Murray, and
T. Calarco, “Quantum manifesto: A new era of technology,” tech. rep.,
European Commission, 2016. http://qurope.eu/manifesto.
[7] E. Grumbling and M. Horowitz, “Quantum computing: Progress and
prospects,” tech. rep., Nat. Acad. of Sciences, Eng. and Medicine, 2019.
[8] A. Glassner, “Andrew Glassners Notebook: Quantum Computing - Part
1,” IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, no. 4, 2001.
[9] A. Glassner, “Andrew Glassners Notebook: Quantum Computing - Part
2,” IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, no. 5, 2001.
[10] A. Glassner, “Andrew Glassners Notebook: Quantum Computing - Part
3,” IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, no. 6, 2001.
[11] R. Landauer, “Irreversibility and heat generation in the computing
process,” IBM Journal of Research and Development, vol. 5, 1961.
[12] K. Sadakane, N. Sugawara, and T. Tokuyama, “Quantum Computation
in Computational Geometry,” Interdisciplinary Information Sciences,
vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 129–136, 2002.
[13] C. Durr and P. Hoyer, “A quantum algorithm for ﬁnding the minimum,”
in in LANL e-print quantph/9607014, http://xxx.lanl.gov, 1996.
[14] S. Caraiman, “Quantum computer graphics algorithms,” Buletinul Institutului Politehnic din Iasi, Sectia Automatica si Calculatoare, vol. 62,
no. 4, pp. 21–38, 2012.
[15] M. Lanzagorta and J. Uhlmann, Quantum Computer Science. Synthesis
Lectures on Quantum Computing, Morgan & Claypool, 2009.
[16] E. R. Johnston, “Quantum supersampling,” in ACM SIGGRAPH 2016
Talks, SIGGRAPH ’16, pp. 38:1–38:1, ACM, 2016.
[17] M. Boyer, G. Brassard, P. Hayer, and A. Tapp, “Tight bounds on
quantum searching,” Fortschritte der Physik, vol. 46, no. 5, 1998.

(c) Trial 2

Fig. 11. Reference and visibility results for 2 simulation trials.

Fig. 12. Histogram: visibility for pixel (0,0) in 265 simulation trials.

63
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: UNIVERSIDADE DO MINHO. Downloaded on April 05,2021 at 13:52:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

